[THEME MUSIC]
>> REGINA MEREDITH:
Not long ago,
we aired my interview with
Travis Christofferson,
who authored "Tripping
Over the Truth,"
having to do with the
metabolic theory of cancer.
Today, we continue
the conversation
with Dominic D'Agostino,
a molecular pharmacology
researcher who explains
the role of ketones
in our cellular health--
not just for cancer, also
for weight loss, inflammation,
and many other functions.
And I'm glad to have you here
to flesh out this conversation.
People loved the
interview with Travis,
but it also created quite
a storm of controversy.
Because to create the ketogenic
or metabolic effect really
requires low carbohydrates
and high fats.
And so a lot of the vegans
who are in our audience really
objected to this.
And so the nice thing
is that a lot of that
is remedied in
today's conversation.
Because you are specifically
addressing that.
So we're going to get there.
But first, when I first
found out about your work,
I was intrigued that your
original studies started
under the Department
of Defense, right?
>>DOMINIC D'AGOSTINO: Yeah.
>> REGINA: And so let's talk
about what you tripped over
yourself in your studies, OK?
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah, it's
a good way to put it.
Yeah, about 10 years ago,
the original grant that I had
was to essentially
understand fundamentally
what's called oxygen
toxicity seizures.
And that occurs in the
presence of breathing
high oxygen associated
with military operations.
>> REGINA: Like
underwater, like SEALs?
>>D'AGOSTINO: Underwater,
yes, so Navy SEALs.
>> REGINA: High concentrations
in their tanks of oxygen, OK.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah.
They use a closed
circuit rebreather.
And the advantage is that there
are no bubbles that come up
when you're scuba diving.
Like open circuit scuba, you
have lots of bubbles coming up.
There's no bubbles, so there's
a stealth component to it.
>> REGINA: So no detection.
Yeah.
>>D'AGOSTINO: And oxygen
toxicity seizures are also
a limitation for hyperbaric
oxygen therapy, which is--
so if you could
develop a strategy
to prevent oxygen toxicity
seizures for Navy SEALs,
then you could potentially
increase the oxygen
concentration for
hyperbaric oxygen therapy.
So that's another sort of
application for the things
that we're developing.
But first, because
we didn't understand
why these seizures occur
and how to predict them,
we had to understand
fundamentally
what was causing them.
So the Department of
Defense funded our lab
to develop special
equipment, which was--
I guess you would call it
hyperbaric environmental
chambers.
So they're a chamber
that would essentially
mimic the conditions of the
extreme environment, which
would be high pressure oxygen
and pressure per se of any gas,
really.
So we developed this technology,
and inside the chambers
we had microscopes, like
similar to an electron
microscope you may
be familiar with.
But the microscope that
we installed inside
was called atomic
force microscope.
>> REGINA: Tell us about that
for just a second without
deviating too much, because
I'm interested in this.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah,
it's called the AFM,
and it uses a scanning probe.
And it gives you the resolution
of an electron microscope,
but you can actually look
at live tissue with it.
>> REGINA: So kind of like the
Ergonom 400 and all the early
Rife technologies but
more advanced now?
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yes.
>> REGINA: Interesting.
>> REGINA: Scanning electron
microscope and TM allows you
to image nanoscopic features
of the cell and down
to the membrane.
And so this technology allows
us to fundamentally understand
what's happening at the level--
>> REGINA: As the
cells are still living.
>>D'AGOSTINO: --of the
cell in the membrane.
Yes, while they're living.
>> REGINA: Wow.
>>D'AGOSTINO: So we developed
that technology and also
fluorescence, or what's
called confocal microscopy
inside the chamber.
And we began to realize
that in studying neurons
that they respond in a way where
their mitochondria over-produce
oxygen free radicals,
which occurs naturally,
but in the context of
breathing high oxygen,
they overproduce
more free radicals.
And these free radicals
impacts cellular metabolism.
So the metabolism actually
becomes dysregulated.
And if you prevent or impair
the bioenergetic capacity
of the brain by inhibiting
metabolic functions
in the brain, each cell is
kind of like a little battery.
And it has electrical
charge called
the resting membrane potential.
And as a neuroscientist,
like we do
recordings measuring resting
membrane potential, firing
frequency.
And this was
tremendously impacted
by high levels of oxygen.
And if you could preserve
brain energy metabolism
with another
metabolic substrate--
we knew that the
brain ran off glucose.
If we could provide a source
of energy to the brain,
we could conceivably
at this time
preserve brain energy
metabolism in the face
of oxidative stress, which
would be high-pressure oxygen.
>> REGINA: Glucose
wouldn't do that.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Well,
the glucose is what
we used in our experiments.
And we would see that with
high levels of oxygen,
glucose actually can
exacerbate oxidative stress.
It can cause more
oxidative stress.
But we did know that there was
other metabolic substrates,
including ketones,
which we study
from many different
perspectives now.
And I guess simply put,
when you metabolize
a ketone for energy--
the ATP is the energy
currency of the body.
When cells make
ATP from ketones,
they produce less
oxygen free radicals.
So oxygen free radicals
are a consequence
of just normal
cellular metabolism.
And you get more of them when
you metabolize glucose than you
when you metabolize ketones.
So the energy
efficiency of the cell,
we call that the Delta
G of ATP hydrolysis.
It's like the
fancy term you use.
Basically it's like a
cleaner-burning fuel.
And you get more energy
per oxygen molecule.
And so the studies that we did
in cells and in tissues kind of
allowed us to
understand fundamentally
that if we enhance
cellular metabolism,
then we could prevent
or delay seizures.
And these early experiments
led me to the ketogenic diet.
Because I was testing
pharmacological
compounds, and you don't want to
give a war fighter, especially
a Navy SEAL, an
anti-seizure drug,
because you can impair cognitive
and physical performance.
And a quick search
online looking
at what do people do when
drugs fail to control seizures
if you don't want to use--
>> REGINA: Right,
ketogenic diet.
That was backed into also
a long time ago, wasn't it?
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah, 100
years ago, actually.
>> REGINA: 100 years ago, yeah.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Mayo Clinic
and now Johns Hopkins,
they run a really
active program.
And I think there's about
150 clinics in the US
that have dietitians and
neurologists that implement
this for not only
pediatric epilepsy,
but also adult epilepsy
and now an emerging
list of neurological
disorders and even cancer.
And that's kind of
the field that I'm in.
The military became
sort of convinced,
the Office of Navy
Research, that this
was a fruitful direction
to go into for preventing
oxygen toxicity seizures.
But they were not
very enthusiastic
about a high-fat,
low-carbohydrate diet.
They thought it would be
very hard to implement.
So we began investigating the
potential for exogenous ketones
to be-- so your body
produces ketones in response
to a very strict diet
or prolonged fasting.
Could we mimic this
physiological state
with synthetic or
naturally-derived ketogenic
metabolites that we could
make in the lab and give that?
>> REGINA: Well, this is kind
of the holy grail in a sense
because so many people--
>>D'AGOSTINO: I'm a little
biased, but I think so.
>> REGINA: Well, I'm saying that
simply because so many people
can't stick to a ketogenic diet.
Them you have vegetarians,
which is more problematic.
Then you have vegans,
even more problematic.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yes, yes.
Yeah.
>> REGINA: And so if you're
embracing the whole metabolic
theory of cancer to begin with,
it really is reliant upon be
able to create or take in or
somehow have ketones present,
right?
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah.
Yeah, compliance is the key.
I mean, when you
look at studies where
the diet didn't have the
effect that you would expect
or didn't work at all, you
realize that they didn't even
measure ketones or they didn't
have a registered dietitian
that is skilled in implementing
the ketogenic diet.
That's absolutely essential.
I went through a nutrition
RD program as an undergrad,
and they teach us that these
high-fat diets are bad,
even though clinically
we know they work.
And the Johns Hopkins
protocol was really about--
it's a dairy-based,
lots of saturated fat,
even hydrogenated oils,
the original diet.
But now our knowledge of
nutrition is evolving,
and the food choices, I think,
are equally as important
as the macronutrient ratios.
So there's a certain ratio
of fat to protein to carbs
that allows your body
to get into ketosis,
and that mimics the
state of fasting.
And what dieticians
don't really appreciate
is that the source of these
fats and proteins or carbs
are extremely important,
not just the numbers
that they're calculating.
>> REGINA: Exactly.
>>D'AGOSTINO: So I think we--
>> REGINA: It can't be
the fake butter that's put
on your popcorn at
the movie theater.
It doesn't work.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah.
Even specific fats, like for
seizures or other disorders,
docosahexaenoic acid,
which is a fish oil,
has remarkable
neuroprotective properties.
So you would want to
incorporate that particular oil
into a ketogenic diet
with food sources or even
supplementation.
And then there's
other fats, like
medium-chain
triglycerides, which
are derived from coconut oil.
And we call them MCTs.
And we know that when we
ingest these ketogenic fats,
our body produces more ketones.
So it actually is
more therapeutic.
And there's dozens of different
fats that we shouldn't use
and some that we should use.
And this information needs to be
incorporated into personalizing
a ketogenic diet.
>> REGINA: For
your own chemistry.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yes.
>> REGINA: And for you on
lifestyle choice-- both.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yes, yes, yes.
>> REGINA: OK, I'm going
to break some of this that
you've just mentioned down into
very specific-- first of all,
if you can just explain
what ketones are and what
their function is
really simply .
And then I'm going to ask
a few more simple questions
like that.
>>D'AGOSTINO: OK, sure.
I'd like to start
describing ketones
in the context of fasting.
So if we stopped eating
today, by this time next week,
our brain would be using
about 3/4 to 2/3 of its energy
from ketone bodies
instead of glucose.
So we were taught--
many are taught--
that glucose is
the only source for the brain.
But now we know--
there were studies
done in the '70s that actually
changed the medical texts.
And our brain is
like a hybrid engine.
It uses glucose, but
in periods of fasting
or the ketogenic diet, it
has the metabolic flexibility
to adapt from using
glucose to using ketones.
And when you run
off ketones, which
are small,
four-carbon molecules,
they generate lots of energy.
There like a high-octane
fuel, more or less.
>> REGINA: Is it always
a fail-safe mechanism
in your body, though?
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yes, unless
you have Type 1 diabetes,
it could be dangerous.
But other than that, I
mean pretty much everybody,
we're hardwired to have this.
Because humans went through
periods of limited food
availability and famine.
So ketosis is a natural
state of human physiology.
And a high-carbohydrate diet
that's fed at least three times
a day has silenced that
genetic program, if you will,
that is activated in humans.
Like it never gets activated
because we're constantly
stimulating the
release of insulin
through high-carbohydrate
sources.
And that can lead to chronic
inflammation and early-onset
of chronic diseases.
So simply periodic,
short-term fasting--
or you can mimic fasting with
a low-carb ketogenic diet.
And we're interested
in all variations
of that, intermittent
fasting, low-carb diets,
ketogenic diets.
>> REGINA: Because in our early
iteration as human beings,
we didn't have access to
high-carbohydrate food sources
for the most part, right?
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah,
not like we do today,
not in the processed
carbohydrates.
>> REGINA: I mean, there might
be some berries or some wild
fruit somewhere.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah, and
even the wild berries
that I get at the store,
they have about half
of the sugar and
a lot more fiber.
And you'd have to be
pretty gutsy to knock down
like a beehive to get
the honey or to even
come across fruit trees.
And the fruit today has
been hybridized in a way--
>> REGINA: Much sweeter.
>>D'AGOSTINO: I grew
up farming, so I know.
Things have much more dense
forms of carbohydrate.
>> REGINA: That's true.
And we don't see how it has
kind of sneaked up on us.
The other day I was at a
farmer's market at home,
and they had old-fashioned
Gravenstein apples
from an old orchard, which
you don't see anymore.
And I thought, that
reminds me of my youth.
So I picked up a couple,
and it's like, whoa,
this is really--
>>D'AGOSTINO: Like a
crab apple or something.
>> REGINA: I didn't
remember how tart they were.
When I was young I
just loved the flavor,
but we've become
really accustomed
to the sugar content of
everything, vegetables, fruit,
and certainly all
processed food.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, the apples
like 10,000 years ago
were like little crab
apples the size of a walnut.
And they were basically fiber
with very limited amount
of sugar, relatively speaking.
So early man is--
I kind of have an interest
in studying the evolution
of human nutrition.
And early man really
consumed a lot of--
he'd be lucky if they got
100 grams of carbs a day
or 150 per day.
And that's really high in fiber,
like almost half of it's fiber.
>> REGINA: Right, which cuts
down the actual net carbs.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah,
the net carbs is like--
>> REGINA: 20?
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah, 20
or 30 or something like.
>> REGINA: Yeah, which is like
a pretty strict ketogenic diet.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah, yeah.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>>D'AGOSTINO: And
things like carb foods
like in a ketogenic diet
would be macadamia nuts.
And a cup has
something-- or half
a cup has like 20
grams of carbs.
But net carbs, I think
it's under three grams.
So they're non-glycemic.
And actually, a macadamia nut is
a perfect ketogenic diet food.
It has the perfect
ratios of fats
to proteins to carbs
or fibrous carbs, yeah.
>> REGINA: Right.
Interesting.
OK, so thank you for that.
Just that background, I
think people are already kind
of seeing the benefit here.
And then one of the things
that comes up repeatedly
is why so much fat?
I mean, did our ancestors
have access to that much fat?
What is it that fat is doing
on a chemical level that
is allowing this ketone
effect or production?
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah,
that's a great question.
OK, so I'm going to take
a little step back in.
So when we stop eating,
what our body does
is immobilize fat from
our adipose tissue.
And that fat gets
into our bloodstream
and is used very efficiently.
The heart runs better off
fat than it does off sugar.
Most people don't know that.
But fatty acids are actually
oxidized quite efficiently
by the heart.
The problem with fats
is that they don't
cross the blood-brain barrier.
So they can't readily
get to the brain.
So when we're fasting, our
body is really running off fat.
After the first 48 hours, we
use up our stored carbohydrates
in the form of glycogen. So
we're really running off fat.
So that's sort of
more or less the fuel
our body is designed to run on,
at least in a fasted situation.
And the ketogenic
diet mimics that.
So it gives your body--
if you're on a ketogenic diet
and you take a blood sample
and you look at it, it
would look like the person
is doing a short-term fast.
It would have that sort
of profile-- low insulin,
low glucose, low inflammation.
Those are all things
associated with fasting.
So the ketogenic
diet, what it does
is it gives the
liver fatty acids.
And these fatty
acids are metabolized
at an accelerated rate.
And when you burn fat at a very
high rate, you make ketones.
So there's something
called acetyl-CoA that's
a breakdown product of fats.
And when the acetyl-CoA
builds up in the liver,
it gets condensed to these
small ketone molecules.
>> REGINA: And that can cross
the blood-brain barrier?
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yes.
So ketones are like
water-soluble fat molecules.
>> REGINA: Right.
OK.
Gotcha.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Whereas fat,
fatty acids are so hydrophobic
they can't cross the
blood-brain barrier.
But as a smaller--
if you chop them up like
a little woodchipper,
you get little small molecules.
And then they can readily
cross the blood-brain barrier
through a number of
different transporters called
the monocarboxylic
acid transporters.
And they quickly cross
the blood-brain barrier,
and they can restore and
largely replace glucose
as a primary fuel.
And when it does that,
not only are ketones
an alternative energy
source, but now
we can appreciate, through
publications in science
and in nature medicine, like
high-level publications showing
that ketones can
alter gene expression.
They have what we call
epigenetic effects.
So they active a
genetic program that
boosts our antioxidant capacity.
They actually produce a
number of different effects
on antioxidant mechanisms that
are built into our bodies.
We call them endogenous
antioxidant mechanisms.
And it also suppresses
an inflammatory pathway
called the NLRP3 inflammasome.
So I know that's a big
name, but importantly--
>> REGINA: But in short, it
stops internal inflammation.
>>D'AGOSTINO: It is, yeah.
It's like a hub.
And when that
pathway is activated,
it releases what's called a
lot of inflammatory cytokines.
And these cytokines are
associated with pain.
Many of these cytokines
activate the COX-2 enzyme,
and that's the very
enzyme that things like
ibuprofen and Naprosyn target.
So our own body makes
an endogenous metabolite
that prevents that inflammatory
molecule from even existing.
So if we keep that
at low levels,
then even under conditions
of stress or conditions
where we would
have inflammation--
you can even go to therapies
like radiation therapy
or chemo, which cause
lots of inflammation--
when it's combined
with a diet, you
can reduce a lot of side
effects from things or even just
exercise.
So athletes that follow
ketogenic diet, their levels
of inflammation are much lower.
So when I got into this
research, 10 years ago,
we only understood ketones
as an energy molecule,
like a super fuel.
But now we realize
that these metabolites
have really important
signaling effects
and in ways that we're just
starting to understand,
from the epigenetic level
to very powerful suppressors
of inflammatory pathways
that are associated
with age-related chronic
diseases associated
with autoimmune disorders,
associated with Alzheimer's
disease, associated with cancer.
So the NLRP3 inflammasome
that I mentioned--
this study was published in
"Nature Medicine," actually.
That inflammasome is associated
with a lot of GI cancers.
So another indication
that being in a state
of nutritional
ketosis could decrease
some of the inflammation.
And we know gut inflammation
is a huge problem, not
just because of the
foods that we eat,
but our gut is like 70%
of our immune system.
So if it's chronically
inflamed, it's
impairing our immune system.
>> REGINA: Let me ask you a
question right here before--
and keep your thought.
Hold your thought.
So I had problems with gluten,
like a lot of people, and just
kind of an inflamed gut.
So I know a very good
practitioner in the Bay Area
who was talking about
various things supplementary.
But one of them was
called COX-2 Tame, right?
COX-2 Tame by Jarrow.
Of course, they no
longer produce it.
Don't know why, but they
no longer produce it.
Are there other
types of-- are you
saying that ketones in
essence have this same effect?
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah, they have
a remarkable anti-inflammatory
effect.
And there is a lot
of plant-based things
that are out there that
need to be studied.
But as you know, the money
for doing these studies
are limited.
But you know I will
kind of say this.
When the paper
came out at Yale--
and I was the researcher that
made the diet that they used
at Yale to run this study that
published in "Nature Medicine"
showing the
anti-inflammatory effects--
the pharmaceutical companies
became intensely interested.
>>REGINA: Oh, I bet.
>>D'AGOSTINO: And I got
e-mails from the biggest
pharmaceutical companies
out there, saying,
can you tell us what are
the druggable targets
that the ketogenic
diet works through?
And it's hard to
mimic, because ketones
work through specific
pathways, but they also
work energetically through many
different pathways in synergy.
And that's how we
know diet works,
and that's how we
know exercise works.
It's affecting all
these different--
you can't take an exercise pill.
It's very hard.
They're never going to make it.
And that's the beauty of
the ketogenic diet, I think.
It mimics this
metabolic physiology
that we would achieve during
fasting, short-term fasting,
which we know has
a lot of benefits.
But it has many
other benefits, too.
I mean, we knew for a
decade now that it's
a very powerful metabolic
therapy for managing
drug-resistant seizures.
When the drugs fail,
the ketogenic diet
works about 60% to
80% of the time.
And that's remarkable efficacy
when everything else fails.
And because it works
when all the drugs fail,
it's working through
a mechanism that's
independent of
all the mechanisms
that the drugs are
working through,
or many mechanisms in synergy.
>>REGINA: In a more
holistic manner, yeah.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah.
And we should have
known this, but when
you have-- the etiology of
epilepsy is largely unknown.
Like we were talking
about that, right?
But it is kind of a breakdown
of the brain's electrical energy
and its metabolism.
And if the diet is
restoring that for epilepsy,
well, you would think that
by enhancing brain energy
metabolism, it would
have applications
for all these other
neurological disorders simply
by enhancing ATP production
in the very cells that
allow us to think, the neurons.
And that's my
background of study.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>D'AGOSTINO: So now
science kind of realized
the application here.
So now there's research going
all over the globe looking
at the neuroprotective,
perhaps preventative strategies
using nutritional ketosis
and ketone supplementation.
Just today there was
a study published
with a ketone ester that
was developed at NIH
and studied at
Oxford University,
showing cognitive enhancement
and performance-enhancement
effects of the ketone ester.
>>REGINA: That's amazing.
>>D'AGOSTINO: And it's
very similar to an ester
that we're studying
but from another group.
>>REGINA: Well, what's
interesting, too,
just on the ground
is a lot of people
who are overweight turn to
the HCG diet, which in effect,
minus the fats initially,
was a ketogenic diet, which
they found out about later.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah, it
puts you into ketosis.
>>REGINA: Yeah, it
puts you into ketosis,
but for an extended
period of time.
And one of the things
I've noticed with people
besides the fact that, of
course, they lost weight
rapidly, is
inflammation in the body
started going away with it.
I know a few women that
did it, and-- boom--
any kind of issues in
their hands, carpal tunnel,
all this stuff just
disappeared as a byproduct
of going on their
weight-loss program.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah, yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And to me, the other area--
that does not have a lot of fat.
So, I mean, that
has to be somehow
insufficient for the long term.
And it would not have
created, I'm guessing,
the same kind of brain support.
Because I noticed a lot
of grouchiness going along
with a lot of the
people that were on it.
>>D'AGOSTINO: It depends,
yeah, from the hypoglycemia.
>>REGINA: From hypoglycemia
and not a lot of fats.
It wasn't working too
well on that level,
but the body was dropping fat.
So on that, would you say
just to forget the HCG,
just go on a standard
ketogenic diet?
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah,
that's a very--
I'm glad you brought
that observation up.
Because you can achieve ketosis
through fasting or calorie
restriction, which
is the HCG diet
or in isocaloric
or eucaloric, which
means you're giving your
body all the calorie
it needs to sustain
growth and metabolism,
a eucaloric ketogenic
diet, which is high in fat.
So if we take a step
back, the HCG diet--
so HCG, we don't really
know how it works,
human chorionic gonadotropin.
So we think it tells the brain
that it's somewhat satiated,
and it helps to preserve some
of the hormones associated
with our metabolism, but
that's kind of a messy area.
And although my background is
neuropharmacology and neuro
control of autonomic regulation,
I still don't fundamentally
understand how it works.
And the science is
kind of lacking,
but when you talk to
people, they're like, yeah,
I didn't have an appetite.
But I can tell you that the
benefits of calorie restriction
are all the things that
you mentioned, right?
So the calorie restriction will
keep your metabolism going.
If protein is
sufficient, it's still
allowing your body to repair.
Like your nails
will keep growing,
your hair will keep
growing, everything.
And it also causes your body
to mobilize fat for energy.
So even though you're
getting calories,
and it could be like only
500 to 1,000 calories,
depending on the diet,
the primary source
of energy that
your body is using
is actually stored fat
from adipose tissue.
So that's being released, but
it may not be to the extent
or to the degree that would be
achieved with a ketogenic diet.
>>REGINA: That would
allow for your brain
to continue functioning
optimally, for example.
>>D'AGOSTINO: To make ketones.
Because ketones
are made from fat,
but if you are feeding yourself
too much protein or too much
carbohydrates especially, that
causes a release of insulin,
and that insulin can shut
off the ketogenic process
in the liver.
So we call that ketogenesis.
And if I fasted a
whole week, my ketones
would be sky high, like
5 millimolar level.
And if you injected
me with insulin,
my body would stop
producing ketones,
and I would go hypoglycemic
for a period of time.
But the hypoglycemia would be--
I would be sort of protected
because you'd still
have ketones floating
around in your system.
So when you're on a
calorie-restricted diet
and it's giving
your body energy,
you go hypoglycemic at
periods of time, right?
Because your body
releases insulin, and then
your blood sugar drops.
But if you're not making
sufficient amount of ketones,
that hypoglycemia is
going to cause a reaction,
and you're going to get hungry,
you're going to get irritated.
You get brain fog.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Whereas if you
keep your ketones sufficiently
elevated, that gives you
tremendous resilience
against hypoglycemia because
it's feeding your brain energy.
Your brain says, I
have plenty of energy.
I'm fine.
I can think and
do and my hormones
are not regulated because the
energy status is up there.
Now, the HCG may
help a little bit
with restoring or
maintaining those hormones
in a calorie deficit, and it
may be working through that way.
But I can't really
comment on that.
>>REGINA: Like you said, this
is your field of research
and you don't understand
it that well, either.
>>D'AGOSTINO: But I know
that ketogenic diet tends
to work remarkably
well if-- you might
get a double benefit if
you have a ketogenic diet
and it's calorie-restricted.
Because it's giving
your body ketones
and you're hypoglycemic.
And hypoglycemia sounds
like a bad thing,
but if you're hypoglycemic
and your ketones are high,
that basically means you're
burning a lot of fat.
And you will achieve your
fat-loss goals a lot faster,
and the ketones help to
preserve brain homeostasis
in general and your hormones.
So if you get
calories down to low,
then you could start
influencing things
like your sympathetic
nervous system, your thyroid,
and your body temperature
starts to drop.
And that will take time to
restore your metabolism.
So you have to keep
the calories up.
And you can cycle, and there's
different ways to do that.
>>REGINA: OK, so
going back to ketones
and looking in terms
of chronic disease
and particularly cancer, one of
the things the medical industry
has had a difficult time with,
as I was reading in your book,
is there's this confusion.
The word "ketones" is
confused with ketoacidosis.
And so the medical industry,
if you have elevated ketones,
it's like, oh, no,
this is terrible.
You're breaking
down, your health
is breaking down and whatnot.
There's just a misunderstanding.
Can you explain why
the medical industry
has been so pitched against
the notion of ketogenics?
>>D'AGOSTINO: That's
a great question,
because I get that at
every clinical conference
that I speak at, and I get
that from the medical students
that I teach, too,
because they're
taught that ketosis is bad.
That's all they know,
that ketones are bad.
They are a byproduct of
metabolic dysregulation.
That's pretty much
all they're taught.
So there's a very
distinct difference
between nutritional ketosis
and fasting ketosis.
But let's just stick
with nutritional ketosis
and diabetic ketoacidosis or
alcoholic ketoacidosis, which
happens if you drink too much
alcohol if you're fasted.
So let's stick with
diabetic ketoacidosis
because that's where the
negative connotations come
from.
And that occurs only
under conditions
with the absence of insulin,
which would be type 1 diabetes.
So in type 1 diabetes,
the body doesn't
produce its own insulin.
And if we go into a state
of ketosis, what typically
happens, because we're
not producing insulin,
our glucose is sky
high, but our body
doesn't sense that we have any
glucose because the insulin is
not there to push it into cells.
So it starts making ketones as
sort of a fail-safe mechanism.
But because the
insulin is not there,
and I told you
insulin is associated
with regulating
ketone production,
you have what's
runaway ketogenesis.
So you have really
high ketones, much,
much higher than you get
on a ketogenic diet, also
in the presence of
very high glucose.
And that creates an acidosis.
And that can be
life threatening.
You go into a coma.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Right.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Interestingly
there's-- so you would think
the ketogenic diet would be
the worst thing you could do
for type 1 diabetes.
But there is a book by
a doctor in Sarasota,
near where I live
in Tampa, Dr. Keith
Runyon, who has a book "The
Ketogenic Diet for Type 1
Diabetes."
And he's a medical doctor
and he runs triathlons.
And one of my stellar
PhD students that I have
is a type 1 diabetic.
And following a ketogenic diet
allows him to use about a third
of the insulin he
would otherwise
use on a high-carb diet.
And he's always
chasing his glucose
by injecting insulin
on a high-carb diet,
whereas a low-carb ketogenic
diet, his insulin needs
are much, much lower.
And his glucose, instead
of going like this all day,
it basically just goes like this
all day with low-carb meals.
And that's going to have
tremendous benefit for him
for longevity.
Because those glucose
spikes that he's
getting on a
high-carb diet, even
trying to manage his insulin--
he wears a constant glucose
monitor, so we can download
all the data for the whole week
and see it.
And it's like night
and day, his glucose
control with a
low-carb ketogenic diet
versus the high-carb diet.
And so the negative kind
of stigma that ketones
have is associated
with type 1 diabetes.
>>REGINA: Ketoacidosis, yeah.
>>D'AGOSTINO: And ketoacidosis
is more likely, actually,
on a high-carb diet, when you're
trying to chase your blood
glucose with boluses of
insulin, which could--
>>REGINA: And
that's what they're
trained in in medical school.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah.
>>REGINA: OK, so
that makes sense.
>>D'AGOSTINO: They treat
hyperglycemia with more insulin
instead of managing--
and type 2 diabetes is
carbohydrate intolerance.
And they're using a carb-based
diet to manage type 2 diabetes.
So you would want to
restrict your carbs.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I know
a couple of people
who have type 2 diabetes that
have gone on paleo or more
ketogetic-type
diets and-- boom--
they start feeling better,
everything's reduced.
All symptoms are reduced.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Puts you into
remission in a week or two.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>D'AGOSTINO: I just
came from a conference.
One doctor after another is
showing a hard data on this.
And it's by far the
most effective way
to metabolically
manage type 2 diabetes.
I mean, you can get
them off insulin.
In a severe case,
they're using insulin,
and you can pretty much
get everybody off insulin
within two or three weeks.
>>REGINA: Pretty amazing.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Sometimes
even the first week.
>>REGINA: You'd think that
would be mainstream information
by now for sure.
>>D'AGOSTINO: If a
drug worked like that,
it would you a blockbuster.
It would be a
billion-dollar drug.
>>REGINA: But this
requires effort.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Metformin works,
but no amount of metformin
could match the effects
of a ketogenic diet
for controlling type 2 diabetes.
>>REGINA: Right.
So let's go from
diabetes to cancer
and specifically
talk about ketones
in cancer, which Dr. Donese
Worden, who you know and works
alongside you in certain ways,
is using this with her clients
as well.
So the place of
ketones in this story?
>>D'AGOSTINO: OK, so
in regards to cancer,
cancer is very unique in
its metabolic signature
or its metabolic, we
call, phenotype, right?
Cancers can arise from an
array of different things.
There's chemicals.
There's radiation.
Even genes could cause it, and
our diet influences our genes,
obviously.
But if you look at all different
types of cancers, what's
very similar is that they're
genetically heterogeneous,
which means coming
up with a therapy
to manage cancer that's a gene
therapy is highly unlikely.
If you take glioblastoma
multiforme, for example--
hence the name multiforme--
you have multiple types
of cells in the same tumor.
So you can have up to
1,000 different mutations
in the exact same tumor.
So one cell can have a
completely different set
of mutations than a cell 300
or 400 microns away from it
in the actual tumor.
So how are you going to
develop a therapy to do that?
So they're very
genetically heterogeneous,
but they're metabolically
very homogeneous.
So they have very similar
metabolic phenotype
in that they have excessive
rates of glucose consumption.
And because their
mitochondria are
damaged in most cancer cells--
and I say that because
of all the studies
that have been done
on cancer so far,
not one study has shown that
cancer has normal mitochondria.
So the mitochondria
of cancer cells
are abnormal in some
way, shape, or form.
One of the key factors
in mitochondrial health--
and we're really as healthy
as our mitochondria, right?
>>REGINA: Right.
>>D'AGOSTINO: So I'll just
kind of interject that.
But one of the key
things associated
with mitochondrial health is a
substance called cardiolipin.
And it makes up the inner
mitochondrial membrane.
And that membrane of
the inner mitochondria
is actually where
ATP is being made.
And it factors in for
the structural integrity
of the mitochondria.
And cancer cells lack--
they have this-- it's
like immature cardiolipin.
And it's a molecule
that's formed,
and then it kind of matures
and is regulated in a way
and built up in a way
to become a functional
correlate or a constituent
of the inner mitochondrial
membrane.
And all of cancer cells
that have been studied
are deficient in
this cardiolipin.
And that causes
cancer cells to have
an impairment in their
ability to use mitochondrian
fuel for energy.
So we know that ketones
are metabolized exclusively
in the mitochondria
to create ATP,
whereas in glycolysis, our sugar
metabolism occurs independent
of the mitochondria.
You can have glucose oxidation,
but the glycolytic pathway
is outside of the mitochondria.
And that's what
cancer cells use.
They actually ferment
the glucose to lactate.
And on the surface it looks
like an inefficient energetic
pathway.
But cancer cells
use this pathway
for their own purpose
to shuttle metabolites
into the expanding
biomass of the tumor.
And it causes the tumor
cells to excrete lactate.
And you get a very
acid environment.
>>REGINA: The lactic acid, yeah.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah.
So that acidic
environment of the tumor
is basically causing
a destruction
of the normal cells around
it and causing inflammation.
And it's more of a consequence
rather than a cause.
And I understand that
there's an alkalizing diet.
And that could help to a degree.
But really the acidic
environment of a tumor
is a consequence of the
damage to mitochondria,
which could occur from
poor diet, inflammation.
We know radiation is a fantastic
way to induce tumors, chemo.
>>REGINA: Stress-- just stress.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Stress.
And chemotherapy drugs
damage the mitochondria.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>D'AGOSTINO: So
there's a variety of--
even viruses.
So the viruses that cause
cancer that we know of,
they do impact DNA in
the nuclear genome.
But they have more
of a stronger impact
on the DNA in the mitochondria.
And mitochondria
have their own DNA.
And the coding
regions of that DNA
are much more dense than the
coding regions in the nuclear.
And DNA repair mechanisms
in the mitochondria
are nowhere near as
robust as the nucleus.
So if you throw chemical
agents at a cell,
it's more likely to
damage mitochondrial DNA
than nuclear DNA.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>D'AGOSTINO: And the
mitochondria's energy
is essential for the
nuclear DNA to create
that genomic stability.
So the nucleus has DNA, but
it's constantly being repaired.
And that's a very
energetic pathway.
And if the energy systems
of the cell go down,
the ATP levels go down, then
the nucleus of the cell cannot
repair its own DNA.
And when that happens, that's
called genomic instability,
and that kicks on oncogenes
that transform a normal cell
into a cancer cell.
So that in a nutshell is the
metabolic theory of cancer.
>>REGINA: Well, people
will have to go back over
and listen to this
two or three times
and take notes and look
things up, Google it.
But thank you.
>>D'AGOSTINO: It's
described in a 300-page book
by my colleague-- or
maybe 400-page book
by my colleague Dr.
Thomas Seyfried.
And not only is it
referenced with like 1,000
different references--
literally 1,000--
but all the elegant experiments
that lead up to this,
he compiled it into one
source that you can look at.
And Travis
Christoffersen's book,
"Tripping Over the Truth," is
kind of like a layman's book
that outlines it in a
very elegant story that
has a powerful narrative to it.
>>REGINA: He did
a wonderful job.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah.
And it's a very compelling
story that outlines this.
And now when I got into
this six, seven years ago,
really into like hardcore
cancer research--
but let's just go
back 10 years ago--
there was no cancer
metabolism conferences.
Now you have tumor
So the Warburg effect is being--
or what I was just describing,
cancer cells using excess sugar
metabolism to fuel their
growth and proliferation--
>>REGINA: Credited
to Otto Warburg.
>>D'AGOSTINO: --is called
the Warburg effect.
And Dr. Seyfried
writes about it,
and Travis Christofferson
talked about it in his book.
So now the mainstream
cancer community
acknowledges finally that
the Warburg effect is real
and that cancer cells,
pretty much in 90% or more,
exhibit this Warburg effect.
And the ones that don't
are slow-growing cancers
that we really don't have to
pay much attention to anyway.
They acknowledge that
the Warburg effect
is a phenomenon in cancer
cells and that it's
the basis for the
FDG PET scan, which
is like the gold standard
of identifying the location
and aggressiveness
of tumor cells.
What they don't agree upon
is what caused normal cells
to transform into cancer cells
and this elusive enabling
factor.
And this is called
the oncogenic paradox,
which Albert Szent
Gyorgyi, a Hungarian,
kind of developed this.
And the metabolic
theory of cancer
solves the oncogenic
paradox, that you
could have many different
factors contributing
to the transformation, the
oncogenic transformation
of a normal cell
to a cancer cell.
So if you impact
the mitochondria
and disable the energetic
status of a cell,
then the nuclear genome
relies on that energy
to maintain the fidelity
of the nuclear genome,
needs energy for the
DNA repair process.
So if you damage
the mitochondria,
that's the source of the energy.
And then the nucleus
of the cell basically
has a stress response, and
it activates these oncogenes.
And the oncogenes
are the genes that
cause the cell to ramp up its
sugar metabolism for survival.
So it's like this
fail-safe mechanism
hardwired into our evolution.
>>REGINA: To protect itself.
>>D'AGOSTINO: To protect itself.
And the immune system is
going haywire, usually.
So the cancer kind
of becomes an entity
that's even outside it-- it
has its own sort of agenda,
if you will.
>>REGINA: Outside of the
rest of the organism.
>>D'AGOSTINO: And it's growing
independent of the organism.
And there's an interesting
discussion by Dr. Paul Davies.
He's actually a cosmologist.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>D'AGOSTINO: A very
interesting character.
And he came up with a theory
called the atavistic theory,
that cancers will revert back
to this ancient genetic program,
which is deriving energy
from glucose fermentation
into lactate.
And I think it ties in--
I don't know if all the
aspects of this theory
will hold true with
the experiments that
need to validate it, but it's a
pretty compelling kind of idea
that cancer is basically
reverting back to--
activating a genetic program
that mimics this sort
of ancient survival program
that's using a substrate-level
phosphorylation and glycolysis
to get its energy instead
of mitochondrial, which
is sort of a newer,
evolutionarily
speaking, form of--
much more efficient form
of energy production.
But because the mitochondria
have a limited capacity
for DNA repair, if
you're drinking alcohol
or a toxic beverage
over and over,
you're hitting your liver
with a lot of toxins.
And it can only repair so much
before some of those cells
start-- you start to
damage to the mitochondria
so much that the liver
cells start to transform
into cancer cells over time.
>>REGINA: So how does the
ketone story come in now?
>>D'AGOSTINO: OK, so ketones are
very unique from an energetic
perspective in that--
I mentioned that they are
metabolized exclusively
in the mitochondria for energy.
And if you have--
mitochondria in cancer cells are
structurally and biochemically
deficient, which means--
I talked about
the cardiolipin is
deficient in all cancer cells.
And no studies to
my knowledge have
shown that cancer cells
taken from a tumor
have normal mitochondria.
So they're either deficient
in the number of mitochondria,
or they're just functionally--
the intermitochondrial membrane
are all mucked up, and that's
where you're making energy.
So one way to exploit the
metabolic derangement of cancer
is to feed the body metabolic
substrates that normal,
healthy cells can derive energy
from, but cancer cells can't.
And nutritional
ketosis does that.
>>REGINA: Starve them
of their glucose supply.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yes.
So when you're on
a ketogenic diet,
it does a number of things.
It suppresses the
hormone insulin.
And we know insulin is a
huge factor in cancer growth.
Many of the cells have much
more insulin receptors.
The insulin drives
different growth factors
called the mTOR and AMP kinase.
And there's a lot of
metabolic signaling associated
with the ketogenic diet
that drug companies are
trying to target.
So you have suppression
of insulin, IGF-1.
AMP kinase is activated,
which is a good thing.
mTOR is lower.
All these things
drive cancer growth,
and they are all profoundly
influenced or suppressed--
minimized in a way that
would minimize cancer growth.
So on top of that--
>>REGINA: WIth the
ketogenic diet.
>>D'AGOSTINO: With
the ketogenic diet.
And that's underappreciated,
because people just say,
oh, your glucose goes
down, but my basal glucose
didn't change much.
I'm on a ketogenic diet.
If you're a normal,
healthy adult,
your fasting glucose
may not change much
on a ketogenic diet, but when
you eat a ketogenic diet meal,
your insulin may do a little bit
of a little blip in elevation,
but if you eat a healthy,
high-carbohydrate meal,
you're going to have a
big spike in your insulin.
And it's those
post-prandial spikes
that are associated with a
lot of the negative effects
of high insulin, which is
inflammation, things like.
>>REGINA: So really simply
put, a ketogenic diet
staves the nutrition source that
the cells, which is glucose.
>>D'AGOSTINO: It does,
yeah-- the growth
factors, which are
driven by insulin,
glucose, the primary fuel.
A lot of people think
the ketogenic diet
is a high-protein diet.
It's not.
It's got like half
the amount of protein.
So it's in a way
limiting the amino acids.
And most importantly
from my research
perspective it elevates
these ketone molecules.
And these ketones serve
two anti-cancer effects.
For one thing, they provide
highly efficient fuel
for your brain in healthy cells.
But your cancer cells cannot use
them to generate energy if they
have defective mitochondria,
which basically most cancer
cells do.
And ketones also
have, I mentioned,
signaling properties.
So they have
anti-inflammatory effects that
lead to anti-cancer effects.
They activate genes that
are antioxidant genes that
will protect normal cells
from further transforming
into cancer cells.
And for reasons we don't
completely understand,
they inhibit sugar metabolism.
So they inhibit
some of the what we
call the glycolytic pathways.
And some of the enzymes, like
hexokinase and hexokinase II
are enzymes that the drug
companies are aggressively
trying to create drugs for.
The ketones do that.
They attenuate, or
reduce the activity,
of the sugar-metabolizing
enzymes that are upregulated
in cancer cells.
So they have much higher levels
of certain types of enzymes,
and the ketones tend to
reduce their activity.
>>REGINA: Right.
OK.
Now, we have so
much to talk about,
and we only have
10 minutes or so.
The late Nicholson
Gonzales-- now,
he wrote some
articles, certainly
over the last few years.
2013, I think, is when a number
of came out about the fact
that there was no proof that
the ketogenic diet actually
worked with cancer.
On the other hand, a lot
of what he was pointing to
were studies having to
do with the Atkins diet.
And this became a point of
confusion for a lot of people,
thinking--
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah,
big difference.
>>REGINA: Gonzales
saying the ketogenic diet
doesn't work because
they studied the Atkins
diet and those who followed
that and cancer patients who
followed the Atkins diet.
Just briefly explain--
ketogenic and Atkins
are not the same thing.
Explain what he was
looking at there.
And why were there no
studies, long-term studies,
available on the ketogenic
effects on cancer
that Gonzales could have
gone from three years ago.
>>D'AGOSTINO:
Yeah, well, there's
an enormous amount of
preclinical animal models.
And actually, there are
clinical trials, pilot trials,
that have been published.
One just came out this
week, or last week.
>>REGINA: But
animal-- some people
say, no, it has to
be human, right?
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah
yeah, absolutely.
There are animal
studies actually
that use human cancer cells.
They're called
patient-derived xenografts.
And there's good data with that.
And there's actually
some good models out now.
We're a little
biased, but we think
that our model is a
metastatic cancer model,
and we think it's very important
to study the metastasis
because people generally
don't die of a tumor.
They die of the
metastatic process.
So that's a whole other--
>>REGINA: Yeah, which we--
>>D'AGOSTINO: I'll get to this.
Well, there is one of
the studies published
by Eugene Fine,
and it was funded
by the Atkins Association.
And it used a modified Atkins,
but more of a ketogenic diet,
and showed remarkable effect.
The title of the study is called
Insulin Suppression Contributes
to--
or-- they don't use the words
"ketogetic diet" in the study,
but that's what they
used, a ketogenic drink.
Because it was kind
of controversial.
So just in short, the Atkins
diet is comprised of like 30%
to up to 40%--
I've seen 50% protein.
>>REGINA: Animal protein.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Animal protein.
Whereas clinically, the
classical ketogenic diet
is somewhere like
8% to 12% protein.
It's very low in protein.
And that's really the diet--
if you have severe,
advanced cancer, that's
what you want to start your
cancer patients out on,
something like a
classical ketogenic diet
that's low in protein.
And you would further
enhance the ketosis
or the anti-cancer effects by
calorie-restricting that diet.
So then you would
have profound decrease
in insulin and glucagon
and elevation and ketones.
And then you
transition them to what
we call a modified ketogenic
diet, which would be about half
of the protein of an Atkins
diet, about maybe 20% max,
but enough to ensure
that the patient is not
protein-deficient.
And then you can
ramp up the calories
once the tumor is controlled.
We do think that the
ketogenic diet would work--
we're developing a trial
to use a ketogenic diet
as an adjuvant.
So when the standard of
care doesn't work, radiation
or chemotherapy, the
ketogenic diet sensitizes--
makes the tumor much more
vulnerable to other modalities
you put on top of it.
And if you go on
clinicaltrials.gov--
and I respect the
late Dr. Gonzales,
but if you go to
clinicaltrials.gov,
you'll see about a dozen trials.
I don't know if they
were out during the time
he wrote the article, but
but these trials are now
in process, and some of
them have come to an end
and show that the
ketogenic diet is safe
and that patients have
a much better outcome
if they follow the ketogenic
diet, especially when they
combine it with the
standard of care.
>>REGINA: Well, I
think the article
I read was from about
three years ago.
So it may be a
little behind by now.
>>D'AGOSTINO: And
there are a lot
of reasons why it's hard
to do these diet studies.
You have to fund it, and
you've got to get IRB approval.
You've got to get
oncologists on board.
>>REGINA: It takes time.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah, and
compliance with the diet.
>>REGINA: OK, so we only
have five minutes left here.
Now let's get into the ketone
supplement phase of this.
Because a lot of people who
are vegans, for example,
even vegetarians, it's like, I
do not want to eat the animal
protein, I don't want
grass-fed butter,
I'm not going to do that--
no eggs.
And so let's look
at the spectrum.
We already know
in general how it
works in terms of mostly fat,
small amounts of protein,
low carbohydrate, lots of
vegetables in particular.
Now let's go to the next
level, say vegetarians.
How would they contend with it?
>>D'AGOSTINO: Vegetarian--
non-vegan but vegetarians?
>>REGINA: Non-vegan.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah.
Much easier because you have
the luxury of using dairy.
And the original ketogenic diet
is really a dairy-based diet.
>>REGINA: Grass-fed
butter and organic cream.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah, yeah.
I would definitely go for that.
Sour cream is great.
I make a chocolate keto
mousse out of sour cream
that's fantastic.
But eggs, too-- so egg yolk is
like a perfect ketogenic food.
So for years, I threw
away all my egg yolks.
And now I feel guilty
because I was throwing away
all the nutrition.
And now if you go to
a fancy restaurant,
you can even have an
egg-white omelet made for you.
They throw the egg yolks
away, which is tragic.
>>REGINA: No, no!
[CHUCKLES]
>>D'AGOSTINO: But,
yeah, an egg yolk
is like a perfect
ketogenic-- so you
have eggs and dairy,
macadamia nuts, or all nuts,
really-- avocado, all the oils.
Coconut oil is
especially helpful
because it's very ketogenic.
It contains what we call
medium-chain triglyceride oils.
And these oils, instead of
being packaged into chylomicrons
and going into
lymphatics, they're
transported directly
to your liver
through hepatic
portal circulation,
and they make ketones
very, very rapidly.
>>REGINA: OK, coconut oil.
>>D'AGOSTINO: So
a vegetarian diet
would be liberal
use of dairy, and I
think organic is the way to go.
>>REGINA: But not milk
and cheese necessarily.
>>D'AGOSTINO: No, not
dairy protein, dairy fat.
>>REGINA: You're talking
high fat, only high fat.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah, I should
make that distinction.
>>REGINA: And people don't
get that distinction.
It's a big deal.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah,
that's important.
Because I actually have
a dairy protein allergy.
So cottage cheese and
milk I don't tolerate,
but I can eat sour
cream and be fine.
I can eat--
>>REGINA: Yeah, cream, butter.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Butter, ghee.
>>REGINA: Skimming the cream
off the top of the dairy
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yes, yes.
And I do source out like
eggs from free-range chickens
and things like that.
And the yolk is much
more rich and nutritious.
And the other foods that
you would incorporate
in a vegetarian diet in
addition to eggs and dairy
would be pretty much all
the green vegetables.
Avocado, as I mentioned,
are wonderful.
Olive oil, macadamia
nut oil, avocado oil
are wonderful sources of fats.
So you what you
really need to do,
and it's a little bit easier
when you have meat because you
can get cuts of meat
that are very fat.
Chicken has a skin.
Salmon is a very fatty
fish, sardines, mackerel.
Things like that are fatty fish.
And I incorporate some of
that into my personal diet.
But a vegetarian
diet is pretty easy.
>>REGINA: Not let's to
vegan and then very quickly
into the supplementation,
because we're
almost out of time.
>>D'AGOSTINO: OK, so
a vegan ketogenic diet
is very challenging.
And I get many emails
per week about this.
And I have a friend
who's vegetarian
and some who are vegan that
really want to do this,
and I'm working with them
on developing a book, which
will cover the basics
about how to implement
a vegan ketogenic diet.
And all the foods
that I mentioned
would be OK, excluding, of
course, the dairy and the eggs.
But as far as protein, there are
a number of plant-based protein
extracts that are available--
protein powders that are made.
>>REGINA: What do you think
are the most superior?
There's pea powder.
There's every kind of--
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah.
Organic rice protein isolates
are pretty good, hemp protein.
The thing with hemp protein,
it doesn't taste all that well.
But there was a couple
products out that
are getting a little bit.
>>REGINA: A couple are OK.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Pea
is a little OK.
I like that a little bit
farther down on the list.
I tried some potato
protein, and surprisingly it
was like very low
in carbohydrates,
like two grams of carbs
per like 30-gram serving.
And so you want to make sure how
these proteins are made, too.
You don't want proteins that are
made through different chemical
extractions and whatnot.
So you've got to do
some research on that.
>>REGINA: Natural,
organic, and so forth.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yes.
But your protein
needs can be met
with various plants and nuts.
Like I said, macadamia
nut is like perfect.
And you can make nut
butters and things like,
which are delicious.
And you could further
boost your protein
with a little bit
these protein powders.
And I have a Dutch chocolate
I think hemp and brown rice
protein powder that I've used.
And I put it into my
chocolate mousse at night.
And so I like broccoli
and various vegetables,
too, that tend to be a
little bit higher in protein.
I make cauliflower
mashed potatoes.
So you just overcook
cauliflower a little bit.
>>REGINA: Right.
It's delicious.
>>D'AGOSTINO: And throw
in, instead of butter,
there's other things
that you can use--
>>REGINA: Coconut oil.
>>D'AGOSTINO: You can use
coconut cream, coconut oil,
and salt and pepper.
And then you have your--
>>REGINA: So you can do it.
You just have to be a
little more diligent.
But now we get to the final
part before we wrap it up,
and that is there are
ketone supplements.
And tell us about how
efficacious they are
and available they are.
>>D'AGOSTINO: OK.
The ones that are
most potent right now
are the ketone esters.
And we're doing the
FDA studies to get them
a status called Generally
Recognized As Safe, or GRAS.
So they're under
investigation now.
The ones on the market now
would be the ketone mineral salt
supplements in combination with
medium-chain triglyceride fats.
And the combination of a ketone
and a mineral salt, which
is essentially a ketone with
sodium, potassium, magnesium
combined with it-- so
it's delivering minerals
to your body in
addition to ketones.
And we combine it with
medium-chain triglyceride
powder.
And the fat enhances our
own ketone production
by beta oxidation
of liver and also
functions as sort of a
carrier for the ketones.
So it in a way kind of
delays absorption and helps
increase the sustained
effect of ketones over time,
adding a little bit of fat.
>>REGINA: So would this be
beneficial, particularly
for vegetarians or vegans?
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah.
>>REGINA: In general, just for
your overall health profile.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah, I think it's
like medium-chain triglyceride
oil but much more effective.
It's a supplement that can
enhance nutritional ketosis.
So you could be on a diet that's
much more liberal with protein
and even carbohydrates,
and you check your blood,
and you can be in a state
of ketosis that mimics
the classical ketogenic diet.
So you get all the
therapeutic benefits
with circumventing some of
the dietary restriction,
classically associated
with achieving
that therapeutic state.
>>REGINA: Well, in the Western
world, we like silver bullets.
And even though it's
not a silver bullet,
it's still nonetheless
something close to it.
It sounds like it's very hopeful
for all of our chronic health
conditions, cancer included.
And you're doing a lot
of work in this field.
Any product lines we can
just go online and get?
Or does it all have to
go through physicians?
>>D'AGOSTINO: Well, some
of it through physicians.
The companies that
are incorporating
sort of the technology
that we develop
would be Pruvit and Kegenix.
>>REGINA: Pruvit, OK.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Pruvit
spelled P-R-U-V-I-T.
>>REGINA: P-R-U-V-I-T. OK.
>>D'AGOSTINO: And
another company
which may have a little more
potent product out there
is called Kegenix.
>>REGINA: Kegenix.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Yeah, and they are
a Tampa-based company near me.
And Forever Green also--
they make a line of supplements,
and one is called Ketopia.
So that would be three
companies right now
that incorporate this
technology into their products.
>>REGINA: Fabulous.
>>D'AGOSTINO: And like I
said, you can take the product
and achieve nutritional
ketosis and get
the therapeutic benefits of it.
>>REGINA: Wow.
What a crash course we've
just had in an hour.
I thank you so much for the
incredible work you're doing
and also for helping us
gain some clarity on this.
Because it's a very confusing
topic, especially if someone
is given a diagnosis
and are frightened
into doing
conventional therapies.
This is really good to
know about beforehand.
>>D'AGOSTINO: Thank
you for having me.
I appreciate.
>>REGINA: Yes,
thank you, Dominic.
You can find out much
more about Dominic's work
by going to ketonutrition.org,
all one word.
We also spoke with
Dr. Donese Williams,
who speaks as an MD and
naturopathic physician
about the use of ketones
with her cancer patients
and other clients as well.
Keep an eye out
for that on Gaia.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]